Fold tutorial (#903)
informalsystems/apalache: docs/src/apalache/fold.md

Folding in a nutshell
==========================

Apalache natively implements two operators users might be familiar with from the [community modules](https://github.com/tlaplus/CommunityModules) or functional programming. Those operators are `FoldSet` and `FoldSeq`. This brief introduction to fold operators highlights the following:

  1. What are the semantics of fold operators?
  1. How do I use these operators in Apalache?
  1. Should I use folding or recursion?
  1. Examples of common operators defined with folds

### Syntax

The syntax of the fold operators is as follows:

```tla

> \* @type: ( (a, b) => a, a, Set(b) ) => a

Reviewer: the closing `;` is missing

FoldSet( operator, base, set )

> \* @type: ( (a, b) => a, a, Seq(b) ) => a

Reviewer: the closing `;` is missing

#### Semantics of `FoldSeq`

In the case of folding over sequences, `C` is a sequence `<<a_1, ..., a_n>>`. Then, `FoldSeq( Op, b, C )` is defined as follows:

  1. If `C` is empty, then `FoldSeq( Op, b, <<>> ) = b`, regardless of `Op`
  1. If `C` is nonempty, we establish a recursive relation between folding over `C` and folding over `Tail(C)` in the following way: `FoldSeq( Op, b, C ) = FoldSeq( Op, Op(b, Head(C)), Tail(C) )`.

#### Semantics of `FoldSet`

In the case of folding over sequences, `C` is a set `{a_1, ..., a_n}`. Then, `FoldSet( Op, b, C )` is defined as follows:

  1. If `C` is empty, then `FoldSeq( Op, b, {} ) = b`, regardless of `Op`
  1. If `C` is nonempty, we establish a recursive relation between folding over `C` and folding over some subset of `C` in the following way: `FoldSeq( Op, b, C ) = FoldSeq( Op, Op(b, x), C \ {x} )`, where `x = CHOOSE y \in C: TRUE`. Note that Apalache selects `x` nondeterministically.

Note that the above are definitions of a _left fold_ in the literature. Apalache does not implement a right fold.

> For example, if `C` is the sequence `<<x,y,z>>`, the result is equal to `Op( Op( Op(b, x), y), z)`. If `C = {x,y}`, the result is either `Op( Op(b, x), y)` or `Op( Op(b, y), x)`. Because the order of elements selected is nondeterministic in the case of sets, users should be careful, as the result is only uniquely defined in the case that the operator is both associative (`Op(Op(a,b),c) = Op(a,Op(b,c))`) and commutative (`Op(a,b) = Op(b,a)`). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if `C` is the sequence `<<x,y,z>>`, the result is equal to `Op( Op( Op(b, x), y), z)`. If `C = {x,y}`, the result is either `Op( Op(b, x), y)` or `Op( Op(b, y), x)`. Because the order of elements selected from a set is not predefined, users should be careful, as the result is only uniquely defined in the case that the operator is both associative (`Op(Op(a,b),c) = Op(a,Op(b,c))`) and commutative (`Op(a,b) = Op(b,a)`). 
```

Reviewer: Let's not use the word "non-deterministic", as the users might want to exploit non-determinism. We do not give guarantees of non-determinism here.

For example, consider the operator `Op(p,q) == 2 * p + q`, which is noncommutative, and the set `S = {1,2,3}`. The value of `FoldSet(Op, 0, S)` depends on the order in which Apalache selects elements from S:

| Order | FoldSet value |
| --- | --- |
| 1 -> 2 -> 3 | 11 | 
| 1 -> 3 -> 2 | 12 | 
| 2 -> 1 -> 3 | 13 | 
| 2 -> 3 -> 1 | 15 | 
| 3 -> 1 -> 2 | 16 | 
| 3 -> 2 -> 1 | 17 | 

> Because Apalache chooses nondeterministically, all of the above results are possible outcomes, unlike in the case of the fixed-but-unknown order that would arise from a deterministic choice.

Reviewer: Is this actually true? I thought that we implement `FoldSet` for some order that depends on the arena representation of a set. So we cannot guarantee that all possible orders will be explored, right?

Author: Only one order will be explored, but the point is that the user has no way of determining _which_ order, so they must consider all of them as possibilities.

Reviewer: Right. The above explanation can be understood as there is a way to produce all possible iteration orders. This is the ambiguity of the word "non-determinism". So we should probably say "fixed but unknown order of iteration".

Author: "fixed but unknown order of iteration" is what happens with deterministic CHOOSE

Author: I've reworded the section to instead say something to the effect of "makes no guarantee of determinism". This way, we're not claiming nondeterminism, but are also in the clear if we choose to go with full determinism.

```tla
\* Max(<<>>) = -inf, but integers are unbounded in TLA+, 
\* so there is no natural minimum like MIN_INT in programming languages
CONSTANT negInf 

RECURSIVE MaxRec(_)
MaxRec(seq) == IF seq = <<>>
               THEN negInf
               ELSE LET tailMax == MaxRec(Tail(seq))
                    IN IF tailMax > Head(seq)
                       THEN tailMax
                       ELSE Head(seq)

MaxFold(seq) == LET Max(p,q) == IF p > q THEN p ELSE q
                IN FoldSeq( Max, negInf, seq )
```

The first advantage of the fold implementation, we feel, is that it is much more clear and concise. It also does not require a termination condition, unlike the recursive case.
One inherent problem of using recursive operators with a symbolic encoding, is the inability to estimate termination.
While it may be immediately obvious to a human, that `MaxRec` terminates after no more than `Len(seq)` steps, automatic termination analysis is, in general, a rather complex and incomplete form of static analysis.

> Apalache addresses this by finitely unrolling recursive operators and requires users to provide unroll limits (`UNROLL_LIMIT_MaxRec == ...`), which serve as a static upper bound to the number of recursive re-entries, because in general, recursive operators may take an unpredictable number of steps (e.g. computing the Collatz sequence) or never terminate at all.

Reviewer: Give a link to the Collatz sequence? https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collatz_conjecture

```tla
RECURSIVE Cardinality(_)
Cardinality(set) == IF set = {}
                    THEN 0
                    ELSE LET x == CHOOSE y \in set: TRUE
                         IN 1 + Cardinality( set \ {x} )

CardinalityFold(set) == LET Count(p,q) == p + 1 \* the value of q, the set element, is irrelevant
                        IN FoldSet( Count, 0, set )
```

Notice that, in the case of sets, picking an arbitrary element `x`, to remove from the set at each step, utilizes the `CHOOSE` operator. This is a common trait shared by many operators that implement recursion over sets. 
Since the introduction of folds, the use of `CHOOSE` in Apalache is heavily discouraged as it is both inefficient, as well as nondeterministic (unlike how `CHOOSE` is defined in TLA+ literature). For details, see the discussion in [issue 841](https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/issues/841).

So the third advantage of using folds is the  ability to, almost always, avoid using the `CHOOSE` operator.

The downside of folding, compared to general recursion, is the inability to express non-primitively recursive functions.

> For instance, one cannot define the Ackermann function, as a fold. We find that in most specifications, this is not something the users would want to implement anyway, so in practice, we believe it is almost always better to use fold over recursive functions.

Reviewer: reference to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ackermann_function ?

Folding in a nutshell
==========================

Apalache natively implements two operators users might be familiar with from the community modules or functional programming. Those operators are `FoldSet` and `FoldSeq`. This brief introduction to fold operators highlights the following:

  1. What are the semantics of fold operators?
  1. How do I use these operators in Apalache?
  1. Should I use folding or recursion?
  1. Examples of common operators defined with folds

### Semantics of fold operators

Folding refers to iterative application of a binary operator over a collection. Given an operator `Op`, a base value `b` and a collection of values `C`, folding `Op` over `C` starting with `b` is defined as follows:

  1. If `C` is empty, the resulting value is `b`
  1. If `C` is nonempty, we select an element `x` from `C`. If `C` is a sequence, `x` is the head value, and if `C` is a set, `x` is an arbitrary member. Then, we compute `b2 = Op(b, x)` and take `C2 = C without x` (`Tail(C)` or `C \ {x}` respectively). We continue the process, by computing the fold of `Op` over `C2` starting with `b2`.

> Note that this is the definition of a _left fold_ in the literature. Apalache does not implement a right fold.

Author: Not really, `FoldRight(Op, b, C) = FoldLeft(  Op*, b*, C reversed)` where `Op(a,b) = Op*(b,a)` and `b*` depends on the details (but likely `b`)

> Note that this is the definition of a _left fold_ in the literature. Apalache does not implement a right fold.

Reviewer: Sure, you don't need both for expressivity. But I think that reversing a sequence would produce `O(n^2)` constraints in our encoding. Btw, the community modules have both left and right folds for sequences: https://github.com/tlaplus/CommunityModules/blob/master/modules/SequencesExt.tla

I would prefer having both left and right folds for sequences in `Apalache.tla`, even if the right fold is `foldl(rev(l))`. We could find a better encoding for it in the future.

> Note that this is the definition of a _left fold_ in the literature. Apalache does not implement a right fold.

Author: We could have both, in which case it would make more sense to have separate rewriting rules and operators at the IR level. However, this is definitely outside the scope of this tutorial (at least v1), since we don't have a right fold atm.

> For example, if `C` is the sequence `<<x,y,z>>`, the result is equal to `Op( Op( Op(b, x), y), z)`. If `C = {x,y}`, the result is either `Op( Op(b, x), y)` or `Op( Op(b, y), x)`. Because the order of elements selected is arbitrary in the case of sets, users should be careful, as the result is only uniquely defined in the case that the operator is both associative (`Op(Op(a,b),c) = Op(a,Op(b,c))`) and commutative (`Op(a,b) = Op(b,a)`).

Author: What's wrong with "... the result is only uniquely defined in the case that the operator is both associative (...) and commutative (...).")?

> For example, if `C` is the sequence `<<x,y,z>>`, the result is equal to `Op( Op( Op(b, x), y), z)`. If `C = {x,y}`, the result is either `Op( Op(b, x), y)` or `Op( Op(b, y), x)`. Because the order of elements selected is arbitrary in the case of sets, users should be careful, as the result is only uniquely defined in the case that the operator is both associative (`Op(Op(a,b),c) = Op(a,Op(b,c))`) and commutative (`Op(a,b) = Op(b,a)`).

Reviewer: Just explain a bit what you mean by this sentence. That `FoldSet` may yield different results depending on the order of iteration, unless the operator is commutative and associative. The tricky part here is that if we define `FoldSet` by using `CHOOSE`, the order of iteration is unknown but fixed. But Apalache does not give you such a guarantee. Give an example of what happens if the operator is either non-commutative or non-associative. It's a tutorial ;-)

### Using fold operators in Apalache

The syntax of the fold operators is as follows:

```
\* @type: ( (a, b) => a, a, Set(b) ) => a
FoldSet( operator, base, set )

\* @type: ( (a, b) => a, a, Seq(b) ) => a
FoldSeq( operator, base, seq )
```

> As shown by the type signature, Apalache permits a very general form of folding, where the types of the collection elements and the type of the base element/return-type of the operator do not have to match. Again, we urge users to exercise caution when using `FoldSet` with an operator, for which the types `a` and `b` are different, as such operators cannot be commutative or associative, and therefore the result is not guaranteed to be unique and predictable. 

Author: Cannot, e.g. in `A: (Int, Str) => X` you can't just flip the arguments from `A(0, "a")` to `A("a",0)`, since that's a type violation.

The other component of note is `operator`, the _name_ (not definition) of some binary operator, which is available in this context. The following are examples of valid uses of folds:

```
PlusOne(p,q) == p + q + 1
X == FoldSet( PlusOne, 0, {1,2,3} ) \* X = 9 

X == LET Count(p,q) == p + 1 IN FoldSeq( Count, 0, <<1,2,3>> ) \* X = 3
```

while these next examples are considered invalid:

```
\* LAMBDAS in folds are not supported
\* Use a local LET-IN operator instead 
X == FoldSet( LAMBDA p,q: p + q, 0, {1,2,3} ) 

\* Built-in operators cannot be called by name
\* Define a LET-IN operator Plus(p,q) == p + q instead
X == FoldSet( + , 0, {1,2,3} )
```

Local LET definitions can also be used as closures:

```
A(x) == LET PlusX(p,q) == p + q + x IN FoldSeq( PlusX, 0, <<1,2,3>> )

> X == A(1) \* X = 9

Author: No? `v0 = 0, v1 = (v0 + 1) + 1 = 2, v2 = (v1 + 2) + 1 = 5, v3 = (v2 + 3) + 1 = 9`

> X == A(1) \* X = 9

Reviewer: Oh, that was a comment. It looked like somebody has put a slash in front of multiplication :)

```

### Folding VS recursion

While TLA+ allows users to write arbitrary recursive operators, they are, in our experience, mostly used to implement collection traversals. Consider the following implementations of a `Max` operator, which returns the largest element of a sequence:

```

> CONSTANT negInf \* Max(<<>>) = -inf, but TLA+ has no literal for ±inf, so we use it as a constant

Author: It's not defined for integers, and also not supported by Apalache.

> CONSTANT negInf \* Max(<<>>) = -inf, but TLA+ has no literal for ±inf, so we use it as a constant

Reviewer: I mean this sentence "TLA+ has no literal for +/- inf" is not precise. You could say that integers are unbounded in TLA+, so there is no natural minimum or maximum like `MIN_INT` and `MAX_INT` in programming languages.

RECURSIVE MaxRec(_)

> MaxRec(seq) == IF seq = <<>>

Author: Yes, but we're explicitly comparing fold to recursion here.

> MaxRec(seq) == IF seq = <<>>

Reviewer: Right. But it would be good to have pros and cons of the both approaches. You can write this recursive operator without `CHOOSE`, but it is not how TLC users would do it.

               THEN negInf
               ELSE LET tailMax == MaxRec(Tail(seq))
                    IN IF tailMax > Head(seq)
                       THEN tailMax
                       ELSE Head(seq)

MaxFold(seq) == LET Max(p,q) == IF p > q THEN p ELSE q
                IN FoldSeq( Max, negInf, seq )
```

The first advantage of the fold implementation, we feel, is that it is much more clear and concise. It also does not require a termination condition, unlike the recursive case.
One inherent problem of using recursive operators with a symbolic encoding, is the inability to estimate termination.

> While it may be immediately obvious to a human, that `MaxRec` terminates after no more than `Len(seq)` steps, automatic termination analysis is, in general, a rather complex form of static analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While it may be immediately obvious to a human, that `MaxRec` terminates after no more than `Len(seq)` steps, automatic termination analysis is, in general, a rather complex and incomplete form of static analysis.
```

                    IN IF tailMax > Head(seq)
                       THEN tailMax
                       ELSE Head(seq)
```

Now, `MaxRec` never terminates, but spotting this error might not be trivial at a glance. This is where we believe folds hold the second advantage: `FoldSet` and `FoldSeq` *always terminate* in `Cardinality(set)` or `Len(seq)` steps, and each step is simple to describe, as it consists of a single operator application.

In fact, the vast majority of the traditionally recursive operators can be equivalently rewritten as folds, for example:
```
RECURSIVE Cardinality(_)
Cardinality(set) == IF set = {}
                    THEN 0
                    ELSE LET x == CHOOSE y \in set: TRUE
                         IN 1 + Cardinality( set \ {x} )

CardinalityFold(set) == LET Count(p,q) == p + 1 \* the value of q, the set element, is irrelevant
                        IN FoldSet( Count, 0, set )
```

Notice that, in the case of sets, picking an arbitrary element `x`, to remove from the set at each step, utilizes the `CHOOSE` operator. This is a common trait shared by many operators that implement recursion over sets. 

> Since the introduction of folds, the use of `CHOOSE` in Apalache is heavily discouraged as it is both inefficient, as well as nondeterministic (unlike how `CHOOSE` is defined in TLA+ literature). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the introduction of folds, the use of `CHOOSE` in Apalache is heavily discouraged as it is both inefficient, as well as nondeterministic (unlike how `CHOOSE` is defined in TLA+ literature). For details, see the discussion in [issue 841](https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/issues/841).
```

So the third advantage of using folds is the  ability to, almost always, avoid using the `CHOOSE` operator.

The downside of folding, compared to general recursion, is the inability to express non-primitively recursive functions.
For instance, one cannot define the Ackermann function, as a fold. We find that in most specifications, this is not something the users would want to implement anyway, so in practice, we believe it is almost always better to use fold over recursive functions.

### Examples: The versatility of folds

Here we give some examples of common operators, implemented using folds:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```tla
```

\*  Re-implementation of SelectSeq
SelectSeq(seq, Test(_)) == LET CondAppend(s,e) == IF Test(e) THEN Append(s, e) ELSE s
                           IN FoldSeq( CondAppend, <<>>, seq )

\*  Quantify the elements in S matching the predicate P
Quantify(S, P(_)) == LET CondCount(p,q) == p + IF P(q) THEN 1 ELSE 0
                     IN FoldSet( CondCount, 0, S )

\* The set of all values in seq
Range(seq) == LET AddToSet(S, e) == S \union {e}
              IN LET Range == FoldSeq( AddToSet, {}, seq )

\* Finds the the value that appears most often in a sequence. Returns elIfEmpty for empty sequences
Mode(seq, elIfEmpty) == LET ExtRange == Range(seq) \union {elIfEmpty}
                        IN LET CountElem(countersAndCurrentMode, e) ==
                             LET counters == countersAndCurrentMode[1]
                                 currentMode == countersAndCurrentMode[2]
                             IN LET newCounters == [ counters EXCEPT ![e] == counters[e] + 1 ]
                                IN IF newCounters[e] > newCounters[currentMode]
                                   THEN << newCounters, e >>
                                   ELSE << newCounters, currentMode >>

>                            IN FoldSeq( CountElem, <<[ x \in ExtRange |-> 0 ], elIfEmpty >>, seq )[2]

Reviewer: I guess, one can write this operator in a much nicer way by using `Range`, `SelectSeq`, and `Len`. Perhaps, this example does not demonstrate the power of `FoldSeq` :-)

Author: `ExtRange`, `counters`, `currentMode` are all just convenience variables. This looks, at least to me, like a linear mode-calculation algorithm in a programming language.

\* Returns TRUE iff fn is injective
IsInjective(fn) == 
  LET SeenBefore( seenAndResult, e ) == 
    IF fn[e] \in seenAndResult[1]
    THEN [ seenAndResult EXCEPT ![2] = FALSE ]
    ELSE [ seenAndResult EXCEPT ![1] = seenAndResult[1] \union {fn[e]} ]
  IN FoldSet( SeenBefore, << {}, TRUE >>, DOMAIN fn )[2]
```

> For the sake of comparison, here are the same operators, using recursion, `CHOOSE` or quantification:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the sake of comparison, we rewrite the above operators using recursion, `CHOOSE` or quantification:
```

```
RECURSIVE Sum(_)
Sum(S) == IF S = {} 
          THEN 0
          ELSE LET x == CHOOSE y \in S : TRUE
               IN  x + Sum(S \ {x})

RECURSIVE BigUnion(_)
BigUnion(setOfSets) == IF setOfSets = {} 
                       THEN {}
                       ELSE LET S == CHOOSE x \in setOfSets : TRUE
                            IN  S \union BigUnion(setOfSets \ {x})

RECURSIVE SelectSeq(_,_)
SelectSeq(seq, Test(_)) == IF seq = <<>>
                           THEN <<>>
                           ELSE LET tail == SelectSeq(Tail(seq), Test)
                                IN IF Test( Head(seq) )
                                   THEN <<Head(seq)>> \o tail
                                   ELSE tail

RECURSIVE Quantify(_,_)
Quantify(S, P(_)) == IF S = {} 
                     THEN 0
                     ELSE LET x == CHOOSE y \in S : TRUE
                          IN (IF P(x) THEN 1 ELSE 0) + Quantify(S \ {x}, P) 

RECURSIVE Range(_)
Range(seq) == IF seq = <<>>
              THEN {}
              ELSE {Head(seq)} \union Range(Tail(seq))

> Mode(seq, elIfEmpty) == IF seq = <<>>

Reviewer: This is definitely the case, where `CHOOSE` gives us a cleaner solution. I guess, the above version is just "too efficient".

                        THEN elIfEmpty 
                        ELSE LET numOf(p) == Quantify( DOMAIN seq, LAMBDA q: q = p )
                             IN CHOOSE x \in Range(seq): \A y \in Range(seq) : numOf(x) >= numOf(y)

IsInjective(fn) == \A a,b \in DOMAIN fn : fn[a] = fn[b] => a = b
```

In most cases, recursive operators are much more verbose, and the operators using `CHOOSE` and/or quantification mask double iteration (and thus have quadratic complexity). 
For instance, the evaluation of the fold-less `IsInjective` operator actually requires the traversal of all domain pairs, instead of the single domain traversal with fold.

> In particular, `Mode`, the most verbose among the fold-defined operators, is still very readable (most LET-IN operators are introduced to improve readability, at the cost of verbosity) and quite efficient, as its complexity is linear w.r.t. the length of the sequence (the mode could also be computed directly, without a sub-call to `Range`, but the example would be more difficult to read), unlike the variant with `CHOOSE` and `\forall`, which is quadratic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In particular, `Mode`, the most verbose among the fold-defined operators, is still very readable (most LET-IN operators are introduced to improve readability, at the cost of verbosity) and quite efficient, as its complexity is linear w.r.t. the length of the sequence (the mode could also be computed directly, without a sub-call to `Range`, but the example would be more difficult to read), unlike the variant with `CHOOSE` and `\A`, which is quadratic.
```

Reviewer: Why don't you give two versions with folds and explain which one would be better for Apalache? I believe that people are not writing TLA+ specs for efficiency. So you should label the more efficient version as efficient from the SMT encoding point of view, as there is no built-in notion of complexity in TLA+.

Author: Makes sense. They will care about efficiency, if they want to use automatic tools though.
